PRACTICAL 10

A. Validating map data.

1. Open the “Kenya_epidemiological_data.xls” in Microsoft Excel. Additionally open the corresponding dictionary “Kenya_epidemiological_dict.xls”, which          
   contains a description of all variables and information about their coding.
2. You should make note of the number of entries in your database, as you will need to keep track of any changes e.g. when you remove duplicates at a later            
   stage.

The following steps we need to perform in the Stage II of performing Structural Data checks
A. Format of the Database
B. Removing Duplicates
C. Coding of variables

2A Format of the database
1. Open Kenya_epidemiological_data.xls in excel.
2. Go to the View tab, click Freeze Panes and choose Freeze Top Row.
   select the entire “child_id‟ column(first column),
3. Under Home Tab, click on Conditional formatting >Highlight Cell Rules> Select Duplicate values
4. Now select the first combo box and select Duplicate and select Light red fill with Dark red text in the
   next combo box as shown in figure

2B Removing Duplicates
1. Select all the columns of existing worksheet
2. Now go to Data Tab and select Remove Duplicates

2C Coding of variables
1. In the current worksheet, select the sex column.
2. Now type Ctrl+F and use Replace Function and Replace as follows
   M-1
   F-2
3. Please keep track of how many values are getting replace.

Step 3 Verifying the plausibility of data
In this step, we perform two basic operations
A. Coding of variables
B. Using a filter to detect outliners

3A Coding of variables
1. Select the age column in the existing worksheet.
2. Now go to Insert tab and select Scatter. You will set chart as shown below

3B Using a filter to detect outliners
1. First go to the Home Tab>Sort and Filter>Filter. Click and apply the filter to all the columns of the
   worksheet.
2. Now click on age filter and click on Number Filter> Greater Than option and type the value 20 in
   greater than field.

Step 4: Logical Data checks
In this step, we perform two basic operations
A. Cross Tabulations
B. Formulas

4A. Cross Tabulations
1. Open the existing worksheet. Now go to Insert Tab and select Pivot table function.
2. Select New Worksheet and click OK
3. An empty table is inserted in a new sheet and a window will open on the right hand side named PIVOT
   TABLE FIELD LIST.
4. From the PivotTable Field List, drag the “stool” item and drop it into the “Row Label” field as show
   above.
5. Similarly, Click on anysth_inf and draw it into the “Column labels” and “Σ Values” field.
6. To include the count of observations in the table you might need to change the value field settings to
   count.
7. Click on the combo box Sum of stools and Click on Value Field Settings.
   Change the value in Summarize value filed by to Count and click OK. Table is updated with count values as shown below

4B Formulas
1. Open the existing worksheet
2. Create a new column with the variable called check
3. Type the following formula in S2 column of worksheet =IF(AND(H2=0, NOT(P2="")),1,0)
4. Now copy the formula to all other cells (ensure that the formula is copied to all rows in your dataset)
   Now use the filter to show only entries with a check value of 1.

Step 5: Verifying the coordinates of mapping data
1. Create a New Project in QGIS Desktop 3.4.2.
2. Let’s add the files!
3. Navigate to Add Vector Layer and add file: Kenya_admin.shp
4. Similarly, navigate to Add Delimited Text Layer.
5. Here we have to add file: Kenya_school_location.csv. In the Geometry Definition section, there is a field called Geometry CRS, in that we have to select                           WGS84 as coordinate system.
6. As you can see 2 points are not on the map.
7. To examine this, we need to save these layers as a Shapefile, to do that select both the layers Kenya_school_location and Kenya admin, then right click           on them and choose Save Features A.   
8. In the menu that comes up, set Format as ESRI Shapefile and put File Name as Kenya_schools.shp
9. After this is done you can uncheck the Kenya_school_location in the layers section.
10. Let’s try and get the details of these 2 points that are not on the map, select the Kenya_schools layer, click on the Identify Features Tool button and then click on the points outside of Kenya to get their details.
11. Now we want to add the district information to the map. Therefore, we will join information based on the geographical localization.
12. In the menu click on Vector, then Data Management Tools, then select Join attributes by location.
13. Then select Kenya_schools as Input layer and Kenya_admin as Join layer.
14. We also need to save the output so in Joined Layer, click “…”button to Browse location.
15. Save as Kenya_school_district.csv
16. And then click run.
    After it is done…
17. Navigate to the location of saved file Kenya_school_district.csvand open it, you should now be able to compare both district and Name for discrepancies.
18. We need to change the co-ordinate of those 2 points which were not on the map. So, open the file Kenya_school_location.csv and make the following      changes, set:
IBWALI: Longitude 34.6459198
SIWOT: Longitude 35.35437012
19. Save the file as: Kenya_school_location2.csv.

Step 6: Preparing data for mapping
1. Open Kenya_epidemiological_data_2.xls, select the entire sheet, go to Insert tab to create new Pivot Table.
2. Tick New Worksheet to tell Excel that you want to place the table in a new sheet.
3. Now click on school_idtodragand drop it in the “Row labels” field at the bottom.
4. Add district_id to“Σ Values”and click on it, a drop down list will open, click on Value Field Settings. Choose Average as type of calculation, because   
   all children in the same school will have same district_id.
5. Now drag and dropchild_id into the “Σ Values” field, click on Value Field Settings and choose Count to summarize the results. So, we come to know how    
   many children per school are infected.
   Similarly, Drag and dropanysth_inf into the field, click on Value Field Settingsand choose Sum. As, infected is 1 and not affected is 0, the sum will    
   give us the total number of infected children
6. Now copy the table, open a new Excel file and paste the values into the new spreadsheet. Therefore, click Paste in the Home tab, then choose Paste   
   special and paste only the values.
7. Remove the last row which has Grand Total and other values.
8. Save this new data table as Kenya_school_STH_surveys.xlsx
9. Now we need to know the total count of infected children, that is, the prevalence of STH.
10. So, w ecreate a new column:sth_previn which we are going to be dividing the number of infected children by the number of children and multiplying by 
    hundred to obtain a value in percent (%).
11. In the first cell under the heading type =F2/C2*100 (this assumes that your number of children is in row C and the number of infected children in row F;
    you will need to adjust the column label accordingly); then copy the formula to the other cells in the column.     
12. Additionally, you could calculate the 95% confidence interval (CI) of your prevalence.
13. You will have to create a new column called “CIlow” (lower confidence limit) and “CIup”(upper confidence limit)
14. You can calculate the limits by typing the formulas as follows and then copying to the other cells: 
    For CIlow: =I2 - (1.96*(SQRT((I2*(100-I2)/C2))))
    For CIup: =I2 + (1.96*(SQRT((I2*(100-I2)/C2))))
    Assuming I2 as sth_prev and C2 as Count of child_id, adjust accordingly.
15. Save this file as Kenya_epidemiological_school.csv
    Now that all the datasets are ready, let’s add them.
16. Open a new QGIS project.
17. First, add Kenya_school_location2.csv to the project. Click on Add Delimited text layer in the menu, and browse to select the file.
18. Similarly, Add Vector Layer and add Kenya_ epidemiological_school.csv
19. Now we’ll join the data.
    Right click on Kenya _school_location2 layer and click on Properties
20. Go to the Joins section and click on the plus(+) button at the bottom
21.For “Join layer” chooseKenya_epidemiological_school and for“Join field” and “Target field” choose school_id. Then click on OK.
22. Right click on Kenya_school_location2 layer and select Open Attribute Table.
23. You will see that the epidemiological variables are included.
24. We are finally done, now we just have to save the files!!
    Select all the layers, right-click on them and in Export select Save Features As.
25. Select Format as ESRI Shapefile and File Name as: Kenya_school_epidata.shp


