Practical 4
A. Working with attributes
➢ Start a new project.
➢ Go to Layer → Add Layer → Add Vector Layer
➢ Select “\GIS_Workshop\Practicals\Practical_04\A\Data\ne_10m_populated_places_simple.zip”
➢ Right click on Layer in Layer Panel → Open Attribute Table.
➢ Explore various attributes and their values in the Attribute table.
➢ To find the Place with maximum population click on “pop_max” file 
➢ On clicking the Select feature using expression E button the following window will appear.
➢ Enter pop_max>100 and pop_max<10000 and click select features button to get all the places with 
population between 100 and 10000.
➢ The places matching the criteria will appear in different color.
➢ Different queries can be performed using the dataset.
➢ Try this command on expression pop_max> and pop_max<10000 and "sov0name" = 'India'
➢ Use the deselect yellow cancel button to deselect the feature to be rendered in original color.


b) Terrain Data and Hill shade analysis
A terrain dataset is a multiresolution, TIN-based surface built from measurements stored as features 
in a geodatabase. Terrain or elevation data is useful for many GIS Analysis like, to generate various 
products from elevation data such as contours, hillshade etc. 
➢ Go to Layer → Add Raster Layer → select “10n060e_20101117_gmted_mea300.tif”, from 
Data folder
➢ The Lower altitude regions are shown using dark color and higher using light shade as seen on 
top region containing Himalaya and Mt Everest. 
➢ Mt. Everest - is located at the coordinates 27.9881° N, 86.9253° E.
➢ Enter 86.92, 27.98 in the coordinate field, Scale 900000 and Magnifier 100% at the bottom of 
QGIS.
➢ Press enter the view port will be centered on Himalaya Region.
➢ Crop the raster layer only for the region under study.
➢ Go to Raster → Extraction→ Clip Raster by Extent
➢ Select the raster layer (if project contains multiple layers).
➢ Select the clipping area by selecting the option Use Canvas Extends if the visible part of map 
is to be selected or manually select an area on canvas by using Select Extent on Canvas.
➢ Select the location and file name for storing clipped raster layer.
➢ Press RUN.
➢ Deselect the original layer and keep the clipped one.
➢ The Clipped raster layer is representing altitude are from 103 Meters.Original Raster and Clipped Raster should be tick
➢ Counter lines are the lines on a map joining points of equal height above or below sea level. A 
contour interval in surveying is the vertical distance or the difference in the elevation between 
the two contour lines in a topographical map.
➢ To derive counter lines from given raster.
➢ Go to Raster → Extraction→ Contour
➢ The Contour configuration window will appear-> input layer(clipped extent EPSG:4326)-> interval between contour lines 100.00-> ELEV-> contours(...)-> open output file after running algorithm.
➢ Select the input raster layer name. Set contour interval 100.00 meters, select the output file 
name & location and check the option to add output file to project after processing.
➢ Press “RUN”.
➢ The contour layer will appear like this
➢ Label the layer using “ELEV” field and set appropriate symbols for line.
 
➢ In the Layer panel right click on Contour Raster Layer and select “Open Attribute table”, 
➢ Arrange the table in descending order based on the value of “ELEV” column. 
➢Compare the above counter line raster layer with the previous Google map image
➢ To verify the above contour files using Google Map
➢ Make a copy of Contour Layer, Go to Layer →Save As
➢ Select file format as “Keyhole Markup Language”, set file name, location and Layer Name.
➢ Also set CRS to WGS 84 EPSG:4326
➢ Go to the stored location on Hard Disk and open the “Himalayan_Google_Map_File.kml” with 
Google Map.\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Hillshade is a grayscale 3D representation of the surface, showing the topographical shape of hills 
and mountains using shading (levels of gray) on a map, just to indicate relative slopes, mountain ridges, 
not absolute height. 
➢ For Hill Shade surface analysis
➢ Go to Plugin → Install Georeferencer GADL.
➢ After successful installation of plugin Go to Raster → Analysis → Hill Shade
➢ Select the input raster layer, select file name and location for storing Hill Shade output file. 
➢ Press “RUN” and Close the Hill Shape Dialog window.
➢ After Raster styling the Output will appear like this