PRACTICAL 6A.
Georeferencing
A. Georeferencing Topo Sheets and Scanned Maps
➢ Start a new project
➢ Go to Layers → Add Layer → Add vector Layer
➢ Select GIS_Workshop\Manual\Prac06\IND_adm0.shp
➢ Zoom in to Mumbai region in the layer.
➢ Go to Plugins→ Manage and Install Plugins
➢ Ensure that Georefrencer GDAL is checked, if not install Georeferencer GDAL plugin.
➢ Go to Raster → Georefrencer
➢ A new Georeferencer window will open
➢ File → Open Raster
➢ Select file “1870_southern-india_3975_3071_600.jpg” from project data folder
➢ Go to Settings →Transformation Settings
➢ In the Transformation Settings window
➢ Select Transformation type → Thin Plate Spline
➢ Re-sampling Method → Nearest Neighbour
➢ Target TRS → Everest 1830 datum: EPSG 4044
➢ Select Output Raster Name and Location
➢ Check the Load in QGIS When Done Option
➢ Press “OK”.
➢ In Georeferencer window Go to Edit → Add Points
➢ Select the set of control points.
➢ Go to, Setting → transformation settings.
➢ Press “RUN”
➢ In Georeferencing window go to → File → Start Georeferencing
➢ The progress indicator will appear
➢ The canvas area will now have the scanned map of Mumbai referenced with control points.
➢ Select the newly added layer in Layer Panel Right click and go to property.
➢ Set Transparency level of raster layer to appropriate level.
output will appear
➢ The Scanned Image map coincides with the existing map.

6B. Georeferencing Aerial Imagery

➢ Install plugin OpenStreetMap
➢ Go to Web Menu → OpenLayerPlugin → OpenStreetMap→ OpenStreetMap
➢ Go to Project → Properties → Set CRS to EPSG 3857
➢ Go to View → Panels → select OSM Place search
➢ The Gateway of India, Mumbai is located at 18.92°N 72.83°E
➢ Search Gateway of India in OSM Search Panel
➢ Zoom in to appropriate level.
➢ The map will appear like this
➢ Go to Raster → Georefrencer
➢ A new Georeferencer window will open
➢ File → Open Raster
➢ Select file “Gateway_Imagery.tif” from project data folder
➢ Go to Edit → Add Point
➢ Select control points from map (Indicated in red color).
➢ Go to Setting → Transformation Setting
➢ Go to File → Start Georeferencing or Press the PLAY button in Georegerencing Window.
➢ The progress indicator will appear
➢ Observe that the aerial image of the Gateway of India is georeferenced on OSM in the map canvas.


6C. Digitizing Map Data

Digitizing Map Data
➢ Go to Layer ‣ Add Raster→ Select “Christchurch Topo50 map.tif” from project Folder.
➢ QGIS offers a simple solution to make raster load much faster by using Image Pyramids.
➢ Right-click the Christchurch Topo50 map.tif layer and select Properties.
➢ Choose the Pyramids tab. Hold the Ctrl key and select all the resolutions offered in the Resolutions panel.
➢ Click Build pyramids. Then click OK.
➢ Go to Settings →Options.... Select the Digitizing tab in the Options dialog.
➢ Set the Default snap mode to vertex and segment.
➢ Press OK.
➢ Go to Layer → Add Layer → Add Spatialite Layer.
➢ Select the name and location for Spatial database eg: “GIS_Workshop\Practicals\Practical_06\C\MySpatialDataBase.sqlite”.
➢ Name the Layer as “Digitized_Road
➢ Set Geometry type as “Line”
➢ Set CRS EPSG:4167 – NZGD2000
➢ Add “Name” and “Class” fields using “Add to Fields List”.
➢ Once the layer is loaded, click the Toggle Editing button to put the layer in editing mode.
➢ Click the ADD LINE FEATURE Add feature button. Click on the map canvas to add a new vertex. Add new vertices along the road feature. Once you have digitized a road segment, right-click to end the feature.
➢ On Layer Panel Right Click on Digitze_Road, Select the Style tab in the Layer Properties dialog.
➢ Select appropriate style to see the digitized road feature clearly.
➢ After creating a new Spatialite layer
➢ Select Digitized_Garden layer in Layer Panel and click on Toggle Editing (PENCIL SHAPE BUTTON) button and then Add Polygon Feature button on Tool bar.
➢ Add two gardens to the region by adding polygon.
➢ The Layer will appear on map canvas
➢ Using the above procedure a point feature can also be digitized.
➢ The digitizing task is now complete. You can play with the styling and labeling options in layer properties to create a nice looking map from the data you created.












