practical8

Advanced GIS Operations 1: 
a) Nearest Neighbor Analysis
➢ Go to Layer → add Layer → add Delimited Text Layer and load “signif.txt” from data file.
➢ Go to Layer → Add Layer → Add vector Layer and from data folder
“\GIS_Workshop\Practicals\Practical_08\A\DATA\ne_10m_populated_places_simple.zip” load 
the layer to the project and remove all rows from attribute table other than India.
➢ Go to Vector→ Analysis tool → Distance Matrix
➢ Calculate the Distance matrix and perform Nearest Neighbor Analysis 
➢ Now you will be able to see the content of our results. The InputID field contains the field name 
from the Earthquake layer. The TargetID field contains the name of the feature from the 
Populated Places layer that was the closest to the earthquake point. The Distance field is the 
distance between the 2 points.
7. Here select the earthquake layer signif as the Input point layer and the populated 
places ne_10m_populated_places_simpleas the target layer. You also need to select a unique 
field from each of these layers which is how your results will be displayed. In this analysis, we 
are looking to get only 1 nearest point, so check the Use only the nearest(k) target points, and 
enter 1. Name your output file matrix.csv, and click OK. Once the processing finishes, 
click Close.
8. Once the processing finishes, click the Close button in the Distance Matrix dialog. You can now 
view the matrix.csv file in Notepad or any text editor. QGIS can import CSV files as well, so 
we will add it to QGIS and view it there. Go to Layer ‣Add Layer ‣Add Delimited Text 
Layer....
9. Browse to the newly created matrix.csv file. Since this file is just text columns, select No 
geometry (attribute only table) as theGeometry definition. Click OK.
10. You will see the CSV file loaded as a table. Right-click on the table layer and select Open 
Attribute Table.
11. Now you will be able to see the content of our results. The InputID field contains the field name 
from the Earthquake layer. The TargetID field contains the name of the feature from the 
Populated Places layer that was the closest to the earthquake point. The Distance field is the 
distance between the 2 points.
12. This is very close to the result we were looking for. For some users, this table would be 
sufficient. However, we can also integrate this results in our original Earthquake layer using 
a Table Join. Right-click on the Earthquake layer, and select Properties.
13. Go to the Joins tab and click on the + button.
14. We want to join the data from our analysis result to this layer. We need to select a field from 
each of the layers that has the same values. Select matrix as the Join layer` and InputID as 
the Join field. The Target field would be I_D. Leave other options to their default values and 
click OK.
15. You will see the join appear in the Joins tab. Click OK.
16. Now open the attribute table of the signif layer by right-clicking and selecting Open Attribute 
Table.
17. You will see that for every Earthquake feature, we now have an attribute which is the nearest 
neighbor (closest populated place) and the distance to the nearest neighbor.
18. We will now explore a way to visualize these results. First, we need to make the table join 
permanent by saving it to a new layer. Right-click the signif layer and select Save As....
19. Click the Browse button next to Save as label and name the output layer 
as earthquake_with_places.shp. Make sure the Add saved file to map box is checked and 
click OK.
20. Once the new layer is loaded, you can turn off the visibility of the signif layer. As our dataset is 
quite large, we can run our visualization analysis on a subset of the data. QGIS has a neat 
feature where you can load a subset of features from a layer without having to export it to a new 
layer. Right-click the earthquake_with_places layer and select Properties.
21. In the General tab, scroll down to the Feature subset section. Click Query Builder.
22. For this tutorial, we will visualize the earthquakes and their nearest populated places for 
Mexico. Enter the following expression in the Query Builder dialog.
"COUNTRY" = 'MEXICO'
23. You will see that only the points falling within Mexico will be visible in the canvas. Let’s do 
the same for the populated places layer. Right-click on 
the ne_10m_populated_places_simple layer and select Properties.
24. Open the Query Builder dialog from the General tab. Enter the following expression.
"adm0name" = 'Mexico'
25. Now we are ready to create our visualization. We will use a plugin named MMQGIS. Find and 
install the plugin. See Using Pluginsfor more details on how to work with plugins. Once you 
have the plugin installed, go to MMQGIS ‣Create ‣Hub Lines.
26. Select ne_10m_populated_places_simple as the Hub Point Layer and name as the Hub ID 
Attribute. Similarly, selectearthquake_with_places as the Spoke Point Layer and matrix_Tar as 
the Spoke Hub ID Attribute. The hub lines algorithm will go through each of earthquake points 
and create a line that will join it to the populated place which matches the attribute we specified. 
Click Browse and name the Output Shapefile as earthquake_hub_lines.shp. Click OK to start 
the processing.
27. The processing may take a few minutes. You can see the progress on the bottom-left corner of 
the QGIS window.
28. Once the processing is done, you will see the earthquake_hub_lines layer loaded in QGIS. You 
can see that each earthquake point now has a line that connects it to the nearest populated place.

B)Sampling Raster Data using Points or Polygons
Many scientific and environmental datasets come as gridded rasters. Elevation data (DEM) is 
also distributed as raster files. In these raster files, the parameter that is being represented is 
encoded as the pixel values of the raster. Often, one needs to extract the pixel values at certain 
locations or aggregate them over some area. This functionality is available in QGIS via two 
plugins - Point SamplingTool and Zonal Statistics plugin.
Procedure
1. Go to Layer ‣Add Raster Layer and browse to the 
downloaded us.tmax_nohads_ll_{YYYYMMDD}_float.tif file and click Open.
2. Once the layer is loaded, select the Identify tool and click anywhere on the layer. You will see 
the temperature value in celsius as the value or Band 1 at that location.
3. Now unzip the downloaded 2013_Gaz_ua_national.zip file and extract 
the 2013_Gaz_ua_national.txt file on your disk. Go to Layer ‣Add Delimited Text Layer.
USIT6P4 (Discipline Specific Elective Practical) Principles of Geographic Information Systems Practical
T. Y. B. Sc. (Information Technology) SEMESTER VI Teacher’s Reference Manual 
105
4. In the Create a Layer from Delimited Text File dialog, click Browse and 
open 2013_Gaz_ua_national.txt. Choose Tab under Custom delimiters. The point coordinates 
are in Latitude and Longitude, so select INTPTLONG as X field and INTPTLAT as Y field. 
Check the Use spatial index box and click OK.
5. Now we are ready to extract the temperature values from the raster layer. Install 
the Point Sampling Tool plugin. See Using Plugins for details on how to install plugins.
6. Open the plugin dialog from Plugins ‣Analyses ‣Point sampling tool.
7. In the Point Sampling Tool dialog, select 2013_Gaz_ua_national as the Layer containing 
sampling points. We must explicitely pick the fields from the input layer that we want in the 
output layer. Choose GEOID and NAME fields from the2013_Gaz_ua_national layer. We can 
sample values from multiple raster band at once, but since our raster has only 1 band, choose 
the us.tmax_nohads_ll_{YYYYMMDD}_float: Band 1. Name the output vector layer 
as max_temparature_at_urban_locations.shp. Click the OK to start the sampling process. 
Click Close once the process finishes.
8. You will see a new layer max_temparature_at_urban_locations loaded in QGIS. Use 
the Identify tool to click on any point to see the attributes. You will see the us.tmax_no field -
which contains the raster pixel value at the location of the point.
9. First part of our analysis is over. Let’s remove the unnecessary layers. Hold the Shift key and 
select max_temparature_at_urban_locations and 2013_Gaz_ua_national layers. Right-click and 
select Remove to remove them from QGIS TOC.
10. Go to Layer ‣Add Vector Layer. Browse to the downloaded tl_2013_us_county.zip file and 
click Open. Select thetl_2013_us_county.shp as the layer and click OK.
11. The tl_2013_us_county will be added to QGIS. This layer is in EPSG:4269 NAD83 projection. 
This doesn’t match the projection of the raster layer. We will re-project this layer 
to EPSG:4326 WGS84 projection.
12. Right-click the tl_2013_us_county layer and select Save As...
13. In the Save Vector layer as.. dialog, click Browse and name the output file as counties.shp. 
Choose Selected CRS from the CRS dropdown menu. Click Browse and select WGS 84 as the 
CRS. Check the Add saved file to map and click OK.
14. A new layer named counties will be add to QGIS.
15. Enable the Zonal Statistics Plugins. This is a core plugin so it is already installed. See Using 
Plugins to know to how enable core plugins.
16. Go to Raster ‣Zonal statistics ‣Zonal statistics.
USIT6P4 (Discipline Specific Elective Practical) Principles of Geographic Information Systems Practical
T. Y. B. Sc. (Information Technology) SEMESTER VI Teacher’s Reference Manual 
111
17. Select us.tmax_nohads_ll_{YYYYMMDD}_float as the Raster layer and counties as 
the Polygon layer containing the zones. Enter ZS_ as the Output column prefix. Click OK.
18. The analysis may take some time depending on the size of the dataset.
19. Once the processing finishes, select the counties layer. Use the Identify tool and click on any 
county polygon. You will see three new attributes added to the 
layer: ZS_count, ZS_mean and ZS_sum. These attributes contain the count of raster pixels, 
mean of raster pixel values and sum of raster pixel values respectively. Since we are interested 
in average temperature, the ZS_meanfield will be the one to use.
20. Let’s style this layer to create a temperature map. Right-click the counties layer and 
select Properties.
21. Switch to the Style tab. Choose Graduated style and select ZS_mean as the Column. Choose 
a Color Ramp and Mode of your chose. Click Classify to create the classes. Click OK. 
22. You will see the county polygons styled using average maximum temperature extracted from 
the raster grid.


c) Interpolating Point Data
Procedure
1. Open QGIS. Go to Layer ‣Add Layer ‣Add Vector Layer..
2. Browse to the downloaded Shapefiles.zip file and select it. Click Open.
3. In the Select layers to add... dialog, hold the Shift key and 
select Arlington_Soundings_2007_stpl83.shp andBoundary2004_550_stpl83.shp layers. 
Click OK.
4. You will see the 2 layers loaded in QGIS. The Boundary2004_550_stpl83 layer represents the 
boundary of the lake. Un-check the box next to it in the Table of Contents.
5. This will reveal the data from the second layer Arlington_Soundings_2007_stpl83. Though the 
data looks like lines, it is a series of points that are very close.
6. Click the Zoom icon and select a small area on the screen. As you zoom closer, you will see the 
points. Each point represents a reading taken by a Depth Sounder at the location recorded by 
a DGPS equipment.
7. Select the Identify tool and click on a point. You will see the Identify Results panel show up on 
the left with the attribute value of the point. In this case, the ELEVATION attribute contains the 
depth of the lake at the location. As our task is to create a depth profile and elevation contours, 
we will use this values as input for the interpolation.
8. Make sure you have the Interpolation plugin enabled. See Using Plugins for how to enable 
plugins. Once enabled, go toRaster‣Interpolation ‣Interpolation.
9. In the Interpolation dialog, select Arlington_Soundings_2007_stpl83 as the Vector layers in 
the Input panel. Select ELEVATION as the Interpolation attribute. Click Add. Change 
the Cellsize X and Cellsize Y values to 5. This value is the size of each pixel in the output grid. 
Since our source data is in a projected CRS with Feet-US as units, based on our selection, the 
grid size will be 5 feet. Click on the ... button next to Output file and name the output file 
as elevation_tin.tif. CLick OK.
10. You will see the new later elevation_tin loaded in QGIS. Right-click the layer and select Zoom 
to layer.
11. Now you will see the full extent of the created surface. Interpolation does not give accurate 
results outside the collection area. Let’s clip the resulting surface with the lake boundary. Go 
to Raster ‣Extraction ‣Clipper.
12. Name the Output file as elevation_tin_clipped.tif. Select the Cliiped mode as Mask layer. 
Select Boundary2004_550_stpl83 as the Mask layer`. Click OK.
13. A new raster elevation_tin_clipped will be loaded in QGIS. We will now style this layer to 
show the difference in elevations. Note the min and max elevation values from 
the elevation_tin layer. Right-click the elevation_tin_clipped layer and select Properties.
14. Go to the Style tab. Select Render type as Singleband pseudocolor. In the Generate new color 
map panel, select Spectralcolor ramp. As we want to create a depth-map as opposed to a heightmap, check the Invert box. This will assign blues to deep areas and reds to shallow areas. 
Click Classify.
15. Switch to the Tranparency tab. We want to remove the black-pixels from our output. Enter 0 as 
the Additional no data value. Click OK.
16. Now you have a elevation relief map for the lake generated from the individual depth readings. 
Let’s generate contours now. Go to Raster ‣Extraction ‣Contours.
17. In the Contour dialog, enter contours as the Output file for contour lines. We will generate 
contour lines at 5ft intervals, so enter 5.00 as the Interval between contour lines. Check 
the Attribute name box. Click OK.
18. The contour lines will be loaded as contours layer once the processing is finished. Right-click 
the layer and select Properties.
19. Go to the Labels tab. Check the Label this layer with box and select ELEV as the field. 
Select Curved as the Placement type and click OK.
20. You will see that each contour line will be appropriately labeled with the elevation along the 
line.
